



Network Modeling                                                D. Fedyk
Internet-Draft                                   LabN Consulting, L.L.C.
Intended status: Standards Track                            S. Mansfield
Expires: 22 March 2027                                          Ericsson
                                                       18 September 2026


           Extending Normalized Forms to String-Derived Types
               draft-fedyk-netmod-yang-normal-form-latest

Abstract

   YANG models frequently define identifiers using string or string-
   derived types whose lexical space permits multiple representations of
   the same underlying value.  This can lead to incorrect behavior when
   semantically equivalent values are compared lexically.

   This document adds an optional extension to the existing YANG concept
   of normalized form to string-derived types whose lexical space
   permits multiple representations of the same underlying value.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 22 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Problem Statement
   4.  Design Goals
   5.  Proposed Solution
     5.1.  Overview
     5.2.  YANG Extension Definition
     5.3.  Semantics
     5.4.  Normalized identity
       5.4.1.  mac-48
   6.  Design Rationale
   7.  Example Usage
   8.  IEEE MAC Address example
   9.  IETF MAC Address example
   10. Comparison Example
   11. List Key Example
   12. Backward Compatibility
   13. Applicability
   14. Security Considerations
   15. IANA Considerations
   16. References
     16.1.  Normative References
     16.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  MAC Address Representation Background
     A.1.  Background
     A.2.  Current State
     A.3.  Detail
       A.3.1.  IETF Format
       A.3.2.  IEEE Format
     A.4.  Why Normalized Form Helps
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   YANG [RFC7950] treats values of type string as lexically distinct;
   equality and uniqueness are therefore determined by exact string
   comparison.

   YANG defines normalized representations for many built-in data types.
   Canonical or normalized forms provide a unique representation of a
   value independent of how it may have been entered or encoded.

   For string-derived types, YANG currently provides no mechanism to
   define a normalized form distinct from the lexical representation.
   As a result, semantically equivalent values that have multiple valid
   lexical representations may not compare equal and may not be detected
   as duplicates.

   This issue has been observed in both IETF and IEEE YANG modules,
   leading to interoperability problems and incorrect duplicate
   detection.  Existing YANG typedefs such as mac-address ([RFC6991],
   [RFC9911]) define syntax but do not define normalized comparison
   semantics.

   A prominent example is the representation of MAC addresses in YANG.
   IETF and IEEE modules define different lexical forms for MAC
   addresses, and equivalent values may not compare equal when
   represented using different valid formats.  This problem is described
   in Appendix A.

   While MAC addresses provide a clear motivating example, the
   underlying issue is more general.  YANG lacks a mechanism for schema
   authors to define normalized forms for string-derived types whose
   lexical space permits multiple representations of the same underlying
   value.

   The resulting normalized form is used for equality-based operations.
   The normalized form is an abstract comparison value and is not a new
   lexical representation.  This extension does not alter the lexical
   space or encoding requirements of the underlying YANG type.

   This mechanism is intentionally non-invasive.

   This extension defines a normalization procedure for determining
   semantic equivalence between values.  Unless explicitly defined by a
   future extension, it does not alter the relational comparison
   semantics of the underlying YANG type.  Operations based on equality
   (such as equality tests and uniqueness evaluation) operate on the
   normalized form.  Relational operators (<, <=, >, >=) continue to use
   the semantics of the underlying type.

   Existing YANG modules remain valid and unchanged.  The extension is
   applied only where normalized forms are needed and has no effect on
   implementations that do not support it.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Problem Statement

   When string-derived types permit multiple lexical representations of
   the same value, the following issues can arise:

   *  Semantically equivalent values may not compare equal.

   *  Duplicate entries may not be detected in keyed lists.

   *  Leaf-list uniqueness constraints may be violated.

   *  XPath equality comparisons may yield incorrect results.

   Pattern restrictions alone do not solve this problem, because they
   validate syntax but do not affect comparison semantics.

4.  Design Goals

   The solution defined in this document:

   *  MUST NOT alter the lexical space or encoding requirements of the
      underlying type.

   *  MUST provide deterministic comparison semantics.

   *  MUST apply to equality and uniqueness operations.

   *  MUST be minimally invasive to existing YANG modules.

   *  MUST be opt-in and backward compatible.

   *  MUST be general across string-derived types.

   *  SHOULD be simple to implement.

   *  SHOULD avoid complex transformation languages.

5.  Proposed Solution

5.1.  Overview

   This document defines a YANG extension that allows a string-derived
   type to specify a normalization algorithm.

   The resulting normalized form is used for equality-based operations,
   including equality comparisons, list-key identity, leaf-list
   uniqueness, and evaluation of the YANG unique statement.  The
   normalized representation is not required to appear in an encoding or
   retrieval operation.

   This extension does not modify the lexical space of an existing YANG
   type and does not require changes to existing typedef definitions.
   The extension may be attached to existing types, derived types, or
   schema nodes where normalized form behavior is desired.
   Implementations that do not understand the extension continue to
   process the lexical type normally.  Implementations that advertise
   support for the extension apply the specified normalization algorithm
   for equality and uniqueness operations.

   Use of this extension does not, by itself, change the behavior of
   implementations that do not support it.

   A leafref whose target type has a normalized form MUST use that
   normalized form when determining whether its value identifies an
   existing target instance.  When evaluating an instance-identifier,
   predicate values corresponding to list keys or leaf-list values
   having a normalized form MUST be validated according to the
   corresponding schema node's type and compared using normalized
   equality.  The normalized representation is not required to appear in
   the instance-identifier lexical value.

   For NETCONF insertion before or after an existing user-ordered list
   or leaf-list entry, values carried in yang:key or yang:value MUST
   conform to the lexical space of the corresponding schema node.  When
   the server resolves the target entry, it MUST use normalized equality
   if the corresponding schema node has a normalized form.  The
   normalized representation itself is not required to appear in
   yang:key or yang:value.

   When a NETCONF subtree-filter content-match node corresponds to a
   schema node having a normalized form, the filter value MUST first be
   valid according to the target node's YANG type.  The server MUST
   compare the filter value and datastore value using their normalized
   forms.  Normalization does not expand the lexical space accepted by
   the type, and a retrieved value continues to use the encoding rules
   of the underlying type.

5.2.  YANG Extension Definition

   module ietf-yang-normalized-form {
     yang-version 1.1;
     namespace
       "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:yang:ietf-yang:normalized-form";
     prefix iynf;
     organization
       "IETF NETMOD Working Group";

     contact
       "WG Web: <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/netmod/>
        WG List: <mailto:netmod@ietf.org>";

     description
       "Defines an extension for declaring a normalized
        form for string-derived types.";
     revision 2026-07-01 {
       description "Initial revision.";
       reference "TBD: This document.";
     }
     identity normalized-form {
       description
         "Base identity for normalized forms.";
     }
     identity mac-48 {
       base normalized-form;
       description
         "Normalized form for a 48-bit MAC address.

          The input value MUST first be valid according to the
          lexical space of the type to which this normalized form
          is applied. All separators are removed and hexadecimal
          digits 'a' through 'f' are converted to uppercase. The
          resulting normalized form consists of 12 uppercase
          hexadecimal digits.";
     }
     extension normalized-form {
       argument form;
       description
         "Specifies a deterministic normalization form
          used to derive the normalized form of a value.";
     }
   }

5.3.  Semantics

   If a type includes the normalized-form extension:

   1.  A normalized form MUST be derived using the specified identity.

   2.  Equality comparisons, including = and !=, MUST use the normalized
       form.

   3.  List-key identity and list-key uniqueness MUST be evaluated using
       the normalized form.

   4.  Leaf-list uniqueness MUST be enforced using the normalized form.

   5.  Evaluation of the YANG unique statement MUST use the normalized
       form for each referenced descendant schema node that has a
       normalized form.

   6.  A leafref whose target type has a normalized form MUST use that
       normalized form when determining whether its value identifies an
       existing target instance.

   7.  When evaluating an instance-identifier, predicates that identify
       list-key or leaf-list values having a normalized form MUST use
       normalized equality after validating the predicate value against
       the corresponding schema node's lexical space.

   8.  Relational operators (<, <=, >, >=) are not changed by this
       extension and continue to use the semantics of the underlying
       YANG type.

   9.  The lexical representation MUST NOT be modified solely to satisfy
       this extension.

5.4.  Normalized identity

   Normalized forms are identified by identity and are associated with a
   deterministic algorithm.

5.4.1.  mac-48

   The mac-48 identity applies to 48-bit MAC addresses represented as
   six hexadecimal octets.  The lexical representation is defined by the
   type that uses the extension.

   The normalization procedure is:

   1.  Validate the input against the lexical space of the type to which
       the normalized form is applied.

   2.  Remove the separator characters permitted by the lexical
       representation of the underlying type.

   3.  Convert hexadecimal digits to uppercase.

   4.  Use the resulting 12 hexadecimal digits as the normalized form of
       the MAC address.

   Equivalent inputs include:

   aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff
   AA:BB:CC:DD:EE:FF
   aa-bb-cc-dd-ee-ff
   AA-BB-CC-DD-EE-FF

   These values yield the same normalized form:

   AABBCCDDEEFF

6.  Design Rationale

   A normalized-form identity names a normalization algorithm rather
   than a regular-expression pattern.  Pattern restrictions can
   constrain lexical syntax, but they cannot in general express
   normalization procedures such as case folding, separator removal,
   IPv6 textual normalization, or other procedural transformations.  The
   identity therefore provides a stable name for a fully specified
   normalization procedure.  A pattern may be useful as part of the
   description of a simple normalization, but it is not sufficient as
   the general mechanism defined by this document.

7.  Example Usage

   The definition should be in a top level YANG module.  While new types
   with the normalized form could be created it is also valid to just
   modify in place IEEE mac-address to support the normalized form.

8.  IEEE MAC Address example

   The following example show that the normalized form can be added to
   any definition.  Below is an IEEE example.

         leaf address {
           type ieee:mac-address;
           iynf:normalized-form "iynf:mac-48";
           mandatory true;
           description
             "A sample IEEE MAC address format.";
         }

9.  IETF MAC Address example

   The following example show that the normalized form can be added to
   any definition.  Below is an IETF example.

         leaf address {
           type ietf:mac-address;
           iynf:normalized-form "iynf:mac-48";
           mandatory true;
           description
             "A sample IETF MAC address format.";
         }

10.  Comparison Example

   The following values use different lexical representations but
   identify the same underlying 48-bit MAC address:

   aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff
   AA-BB-CC-DD-EE-FF

   Because both types declare the same mac-48 normalized form, both
   values yield the same normalized form:

      AABBCCDDEEFF

   Implementations that support this extension compare the values using
   the normalized form for equality and uniqueness operations, while
   preserving each type's lexical requirements.

11.  List Key Example

   list fdb-entry {
       key "mac vlan";
       leaf mac {
         type mac-address;
         iynf:normalized-form "iynf:mac-48";
       }
       leaf vlan {
           type uint16;
       }
       leaf port {
           type string;
       }
   }

   A list key using the IETF typedef continues to accept only the IETF
   colon-separated lexical form.  A corresponding IEEE model can use the
   IEEE typedef and preserve the IEEE dash-separated lexical form.  In
   both cases, the shared mac-48 normalized form enables consistent
   equality and duplicate detection across representations.

12.  Backward Compatibility

   Existing YANG models are unaffected unless the extension is used.
   The lexical space and encoding requirements of the underlying type
   are unchanged.  Behavior changes only for operations whose semantics
   depend on equality or identity.

13.  Applicability

   While motivated by MAC addresses, this mechanism can apply to any
   string-derived type with multiple equivalent representations,
   including case-insensitive identifiers, formatted identifiers, and
   normalized encodings.

14.  Security Considerations

   Normalization reduces ambiguity and helps prevent duplicate or
   conflicting configuration entries.

   Implementations MUST ensure that normalization algorithms are
   deterministic and unambiguous.

15.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

16.  References

16.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC6991]  Schoenwaelder, J., Ed., "Common YANG Data Types",
              RFC 6991, DOI 10.17487/RFC6991, July 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6991>.

   [RFC7950]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language",
              RFC 7950, DOI 10.17487/RFC7950, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7950>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC9911]  Schönwälder, J., Ed., "Common YANG Data Types", RFC 9911,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9911, December 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9911>.

16.2.  Informative References

   [IEEE-802-1Qcw]
              IEEE, "IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area
              Networks--Bridges and Bridged Networks Amendment 36: YANG
              Data Models for Scheduled Traffic, Frame Preemption, and
              Per-Stream Filtering and Policing", IEEE 802.1Qcw-2023, 17
              November 2023,
              <https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2023.10317806>.

Appendix A.  MAC Address Representation Background

A.1.  Background

   MAC Address Formats in the IETF and IEEE YANG modules are different.

A.2.  Current State

   The IETF and IEEE YANG modules define MAC-address types derived from
   the YANG string type, but use different lexical patterns and
   canonical representations.  The issue is that the IETF and IEEE use
   different patterns and have different canonical forms, which leads to
   a situation where equivalent MAC Addresses will not match.

   Both organizations have a long history of supporting these formats.

   This appendix is meant to document the issue, and support the
   solution proposed in this document.

   For example, the following MAC Address is in IETF Canonical Format

      90:10:00:01:02:aa

   For example, the following MAC Address is in IEEE Canonical Format

      90-10-00-01-02-AA

   The MAC addresses are equivalent, but will not match if used in an
   XPath, or as a key, or any string comparison.

   There are several potential trouble spots in published IETF YANG
   modules.

A.3.  Detail

A.3.1.  IETF Format

   The IETF Format (from ietf-yang-types@2013-07-15.yang) [RFC9911] used
   in the mac-address typedef is found below.

   typedef mac-address {
    type string {
      pattern '[0-9a-fA-F]{2}(:[0-9a-fA-F]{2}){5}';
    }
    description
     "The mac-address type represents an IEEE 802 MAC address.
      The canonical representation uses lowercase characters.

      In the value set and its semantics, this type is equivalent
      to the MacAddress textual convention of the SMIv2.";
    reference
     "IEEE 802: IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area
                Networks: Overview and Architecture
      RFC 2579: Textual Conventions for SMIv2";
   }

A.3.2.  IEEE Format

   The IEEE Format used in the mac-address typedef [IEEE-802-1Qcw] is
   found below.

   typedef mac-address {
    type string {
      pattern "[0-9a-fA-F]{2}(-[0-9a-fA-F]{2}){5}";
    }
    description
      "The mac-address type represents a MAC address in the canonical
       format and hexadecimal format specified by IEEE Std 802. The
       hexadecimal representation uses uppercase characters.";
    reference
      "3.1, 8.1 of IEEE Std 802";
   }

A.4.  Why Normalized Form Helps

   Normal form allows these definitions to remain.  The YANG extension
   described in this document enables comparison of MAC addresses
   regardless of the format.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Don Fedyk
   LabN Consulting, L.L.C.
   Email: dfedyk@labn.net


   Scott Mansfield
   Ericsson
   Email: scott.mansfield@ericsson.com
